from the 10th of July Jessica let's join
the prime minister has just arrived at
the podium good evening
since I last speak to you from this
podium we've continued to make progress
nationally against the virus we are now
reporting regularly fewer than 1,000 new
cases each day the Office for National
Statistics estimates that between the
14th and of June and the 27th of June
the most recent period they have
analyzed 25,000 people in the community
in England had the virus one person in
every 2,200 sage assess that the our
rate the average number of people each
infected person passes the virus on to
remains between nine point seven and
nine point nine across the UK sage also
assessed that in England the number of
new infections is shrinking by between
two and five percent every day and while
the number of people dying with
coronavirus remains too high the numbers
do continue to fall now of course this
picture is not universal
there are areas such as Leicester where
the virus is still more prevalent than
we would like we always said there would
be local outbreaks requiring local
action this is to be expected and will
I'm afraid be a feature of our lives for
some time to come but that should not
take away from the great progress we
have made together as a country against
this vicious disease this progress is
the reason why we've been able slowly
carefully cautiously to ease the
national lockdown without doubt lockdown
has saved many hundreds of thousands of
lives but it has also had a devastating
impact on our way of life and our
economy and of course lockdown has not
yet been lifted entirely indoor gyms
nail bars swimming pools are still
closed
math
mass gatherings are still provided a
social distancing is still essential I
want these restrictions to be lifted as
soon as possible of course I didn't
we've established task forces to work
rapidly and closely with the sector's
that remain closed to explore how they
can be Co bid secure and I'm pleased to
report that a good progress is being
made
next week we will set out a timetable
for their reopening though of course I
can only lift those remaining national
restrictions as and when it is safe to
do so
our goal remains to enable as many
people as possible to live their lives
as close to normally as possible in a
way which is as fair and as safe as
possible and to achieve this we need to
move away from blanket national measures
to targeted local measures so instead of
locking down the whole country we will
lock down specific premises or local
areas where the virus is spreading
instead of closing down non-essential
retail and hospitality nationwide we
will only shut establishments locally as
required instead of shutting all schools
for most pupils from September we will
only shut those schools where it is
absolutely necessary to control an
outbreak and instead of quarantine
arrivals from the whole world
we will only quarantine arrivals from
those countries where the viruses sadly
and not yet under control were already
implementing this targeted approach in
England in weston-super-mare
we identified an outbreak in a hospital
closed it to visitors and new admissions
tested all staff and patients and gave
the hospital a deep-clean the outbreak
was contained and the hospital is open
again in Kirklees we identified night
break at a meatpacking plant shut down
the plant moved in a mobile testing unit
tested all employees
and trace the contacts of those who were
positive the outbreak was contained and
the plant has reopened with additional
safety measures in place and of course
more recently in Leicester we identified
a community-wide outbreak which was not
restricted to a single location unlike
Western Super mayor and Kirklees public
health England engaged with the local
authority mobile testing units were
deployed full data was shared cancer-y
data was shared on the 11th of June
postcode level data was shared last week
this enhanced monitoring through
additional testing showed that the
infection rate in Leicester was three
times the next highest infection rate in
any other city in the country so on
Monday the health secretary announced a
local lockdown measures in Leicester for
an it an initial period of two weeks in
each of these cases the problems
identified were specific to
weston-super-mare Kirklees and Leicester
so of course it made sense to take
action locally rather than reimpose
restrictions on the whole country we're
learning the whole time with each local
light break we see what works well and
what not so well so that we do better
next time
informed by our experience of these
cases we've developed an approach for
controlling future local outbreaks which
has five principal components monitoring
engagement testing targeted restrictions
and finally as a last resort not done
first monitoring public health England
working with the joint biosecurity
Centre will examine carefully data on
the spread of the disease and people's
behavior across the country they will
look out for emerging trends rising case
numbers and other indicators or taking
into account local factors critically we
have made local data available to all
directors of Public Health in local
authorities so they too can monitor
what's happening in their area
and local data will also be available to
the public on the garba
UK dashboard second engagement if
monitoring identifies local problems NHS
tests and trace and public health
England will work with the relevant
local authority to develop a deeper
understanding of the problem and
identify solutions working with local
agencies we will seek to keep the local
community informed at every stage so
they know what's happening on what
actions if any they need to take third
testing we now have substantial testing
capacity nationwide and we have the
ability to target that capacity at local
areas in order to get a grip on emerging
outbreaks scaled up testing at a local
level
combined with contract taste contact
tasting testing tracing unforgiving
contact contract contact tracing through
NHS tests and trace can control the
virus and thus avoid more stringent
measures fourth targeted restrictions if
the virus continues to spread we will
restrict activities of particular
locations and close individual premises
as in weston-super-mare and Kirklees we
will restrict access to places which
become hotspots for the virus while
testing people who have spent time in
those places and tracing the contacts of
anyone who test positive fifth local
lockdown if the previous measures have
not proven to be enough we will
introduce local lockdowns extending
across whole communities as in Leicester
that could mean shutting down business
venues that would otherwise be opened
closing schools or urging people once
more to stay at home local lock downs
will be carefully calibrated depending
on the
typical specific circumstances of each
outbreak and we are continually
exploring smarter means of containing
the virus so that is the approach we
will take as local outbreaks occur and
we will set out more detail soon let me
end by looking forward to this weekend
tomorrow there will be a moment of
remembrance for those who have lives who
have tragically been lost before their
time and 5 p.m. on Sunday the NHS is
72nd birthday we can all come together
to clap those who have worked tirelessly
and selflessly to help the nation get
through this pandemic I know everyone
will be looking forward to the
relaxation of national restrictions as
lockdown eases we should focus on
supporting the livelihoods of business
owners and their employees up and down
the country all of whom are opening
their doors for the first time in more
than three months they are our local
restaurants hairdressers libraries
museums cinemas and yes pubs
they're also our hotels B and B's indeed
much of our tourism industry all these
businesses and their workers have put in
a heroic effort to prepare their venues
for this reopening to work out a way to
trade that keeps their customers safe
but the success of these businesses the
livelihoods of those who rely on them
and ultimately the economic health of
the whole country is dependent on every
single one of us acting responsibly we
must not let them down lock down only
succeeded in controlling the virus
because everyone worked together and we
will only succeed in Rio
if everyone works together again because
we're not out of the woods yet
the virus is still with us
and the spike in Lester has shown that
if it starts running out of control
again this government will not hesitate
in putting on the brakes and re imposing
restrictions anyone who flout social
distancing and covert secure rules is
not only putting us all at risk but
letting down those businesses and
workers who have done so much to prepare
for this new normal
so as we take this next step our biggest
step yet on the road to recovery I urge
the British people to do so safely
remember don't gather in groups of more
than six outside or two households in
any setting keep your distance from
those outside your household two metres
if you can one meter with precautions if
you can't wash your hands let's all stay
alert control the virus save lives and
enjoy summer safely Thanks do either
Chris or Patrick have anything you want
to say no okay well it's I think in that
case we will go straight to our
questions from members of the public in
there and the media and we've got a
question first from David Frum from
Milton Keynes David the event industry
has been decimated by the restrictions
put in place the combat Cove in 1919
site for these restrictions our industry
faces a long period of enforced closure
will the government offer any further
assistance to the event and Arts India
to ensure that it survives the next few
months thank you well thank you very
much David and the
industry the arts industry the theater
sector all of them have had a incredibly
tough time and I know how difficult it
has been what we've tried to do David is
to support every sector of the UK
economy jobs incomes to the tune of 120
billion pounds so far
I know that particularly in the event
Anan arts industry people are anxious
about when it's going to be their turn
to to unlock and that's why I've
announced tonight that we will next week
be setting out a timetable so that we
can get you all preparing get underway
and make sure that we're working
together to get your businesses as
covitz acure as we can possibly make
them we will be setting out a timetable
next week but but David the the crucial
thing is that we want life to get back
as I said as fast as possible to as
normal as possible get the disease down
so that the events in arts industry
really have a chance of of recovering
but you can also take it David that we
will be doing everything that we
reasonably can are to support you to
support the arts the theater the events
world in in the interim and nothing from
from either Chris or Patrick I thank you
so much can we go to a tahina from Leeds
please Edina asks there are fears of a
second way from doctors and those who
are experts in the medical field what
are the contingency plans in place if a
second wave was to occur what I'm going
to ask both Chris and Patrick to come in
on on this but clearly that you know a
huge amount of work has been devoted to
the possibility he know of a second wave
ever since the disease arrived in in
this country indeed before because they
are anxiety about the second wave has
been very much at the forefront of our
minds we will we will obviously keep all
sorts of measures in reserve
the the local lockdown that I talked
about the the regional lock Dan's a a
national lockdown of course has to be as
it were the response of the ultimate
resort we really don't want to do that
again we really don't want to do that
again so we will also be looking at
other ways in which we can respond to
the possibility of a second wave that
reflect particular vulnerabilities of
particular groups and the out the the
prevalence of the second wave in in
certain areas and we'll be bringing
forward more detail about exactly how we
propose to do that shortly but I wonder
whether Chris and Patrick want to say
anything more about about the second way
I mean a second wave is something which
everybody I think realizes is a
possibility and in fact we're beginning
to see the possibility of some second
waves elsewhere in the world and this
possibility would exist with us for a
very long time so we have to prepare for
that and there's a lot of preparations
going on clearly the best thing to do is
to try and make that as unlikely as
possible and that's why the points that
the Prime Minister is making about as
the economy is opened are all of us
taking that extremely responsibly
sticking to the social distancing rules
sticking to the two meters if we can one
meter plus with mitigations if we cannot
all the other things that have been
recommended ranging from the simple
things like washing our hands to using
face masks on public transport all of
these things are absolutely essential
and if individuals families firms do not
take them seriously the probability of a
second wave goes up very very sharply
but there are of course also things
winter is one of them which may work to
the virus's advantage even if we are all
of us working incredibly hard and we
have to be ready for that possibility
and are clearly there are plans and as a
prime minister says they start off with
dealing with local outbreaks and then it
is possible to gradually escalate but
what we want to do is minimize the
chance and then deal with individual
Rex as they happen well I completely
agree that the the key is to make sure
that the cove is secure approach is
across society we all stick to it it's
particularly important as the measures
are released now that we stick with the
rules as chris has described them and
that should be enough to keep this under
control but we'll still see local
outbreaks there will be an increase in
local outbreaks there's no question
about that and we need to be able to map
monitor and deal with those and then we
need to make sure that by keeping to the
rules we reduce any upswing nationally
and we try to make sure that as winter
comes which is the big risk that we're
prepared to be able to deal with it so
this isn't something that's gone away
it's something that's been suppressed
and we need to make sure that we keep it
suppressed through living with the rules
we've got for a more covert safe world
absolutely the only thing I would I
would add is if you compare our
situation 1902 to where we were in in
February or March as two tools that we
now have possibly that we didn't have or
certainly that we didn't have back then
and one is of course the the
therapeutics that are now available
particularly dexamethasone which was
trialed and pioneered whose use was
pioneered in this country which is
effective to quite a large degree in in
reducing mortality which is an important
thing and our drugs or preparations will
get better but we also have NHS tests
and trace which will assist in those
that local crackdown so those local
lockdowns where we need to do them but
that doesn't mean we can be remotely
complacent as chris said you know we
really have to be disciplined in order
to get through this and and and the the
viruses is still out there as as Chris
and Patrick have said let's go to Alex
for size of the BBC Thank You Prime
Minister Samaras been described as Super
Saturday are you confident at this point
you've struck the right balance between
the country's health and the economy
and are you confident you've got the
right public messaging and to the
scientists if I may are you comfortable
with the pace that this unlocking is
progressing and Prime Minister can I put
to you the first ministers of Wales and
Scotland have described your travel
quarantine plans as shambolic are they
right well first of all on the Alex on
the on the balance it is incredibly
important to get the balance right and
our priority is health our priorities is
that is the health of the British public
and of our country and we look at where
we are with with the prevalence of the
disease down to one in 2,200 now we look
at the efforts of the public have made
we think that this is the moment
cautiously to to reopen the the
hospitality sector in the way that we're
doing but our advice to everybody is to
respect the guidance two metres or one
meter plus mitigations wash your hands
use face coverings when you're in a
confined place amongst people that you
don't normally meet all those things are
very very important and if we do that I
think we'll get through it and we'll get
our our businesses our Hospital
hospitality sector back in the way that
they they want and before I asked Chris
and Patrick to come out just I'll just
say something on on the decisions on
quarantine and under bridges and how
that's going to work actually I think
we've trailed this for a very long time
Alex we've always said that we would
have a strong quarantine regime in place
and that's what we are going to have
large numbers of countries around the
world where I'm afraid the disease's is
still prevalent or indeed becoming more
prevalent we're going to keep the 14 day
quarantine system there are some
countries and the list has been
published today where we have reciprocal
air bridge arrangements I know that
administration's in in in wells and
earned and Scotland you know may may
have their own take on this but my
impression of the of the way we've been
working as a UK is
that we you know generally speaking we
we are following very very similar paths
if it's slightly different speeds I mean
in terms of pace every owner we really
should be realistic that there are
really serious risks on both sides of
the path that we as a country we as
society are trying to walk go too far
one side and the virus comes back again
go too far the other side and we get
even further and I speak as someone
Yunus is a medical point increases in
unemployment deprivation increasing and
all the social ills ago with that so we
are we are either side of the path we're
on there are risks and we're going to
have health problems and we're going to
have economic problems for sure so what
we're trying to do is walk this narrow
path there is no perfect time there is
no perfect exact way of doing it what
this is is an attempt to balance as best
we can the multiple risks in a way that
makes it possible for society to be as
close as possible to normal whilst
living alongside this virus which we
will have to continue to do we are this
virus there's a long way from gone but
it's not going to be gone for a very
very long time it's now a lot lower than
it was currently all cause mortality is
now back across the entire country at
roughly the normal rate for this time of
year
so this is a reasonable time to look at
this balance and actually say well we're
gonna have to take risks whatever we do
and this seems a reasonable package of
risks at this particular time at this
particular pace but none of us believe
and I'm sure nobody watching this
believes this is a risk-free next step
it is absolutely not and that's why we
have to be really serious about it
wanting to support all of the businesses
are opening wanting to support all the
people who are wanting to meet loved
ones but at the same time being really
disciplined all of us about trying to do
all the things that make it less easy
for the virus to come back again because
these are rip these twin risks are gonna
be with us very very long time and
measure
get tested if you have symptoms yet make
sure that we track we can understand and
work out where outbreaks are occurring
that's what's key so the tested trace is
terribly important as part of this as we
go into the next stage and we need to
measure in order to know what to do next
thanks very much Paul brand ITV News
Thank You Prime Minister
you're asking people tomorrow to use
their judgement but what is your
judgment what is it that you want people
to do are you saying that we all have a
duty tomorrow to get out and SPECT and
to the scientists is one drink in a pub
if you want to drive is it one drink if
you want to safely socially distance or
people or can people think they can have
as much as they want thanks very much
Paul well I think that I want in my view
my urgings - everybody's can be summed
up in the phrase enjoy summer safely I
mean just I do want people to feel that
it's safe to go and enjoy themselves to
enjoy hospitality but it's got to be
done in a responsible way
you know the heads of parties got to
give their name contact details
everybody behind the the bar behind the
to the in the in the restaurant or
wherever got to be done got to observe
social distancing wash hands and and
this will be a success if not as chris
says the risks are there and they're
obvious and I'm afraid that the risks
are absolutely manifest in other
countries that we know and love well
where where you know there are
difficulties and we've got a we've got a
look at that and think we don't want to
go down that route there are ways of
avoiding it we can do it if we if we if
we do it together
so enjoy summer safely and that's
applies also to alcohol couldn't
couldn't agree more thank you thank you
Paul
Andy Bell channel 5 Andy
can you euros Andy
yeah I'm apologies thank you very much
prime minister um we haven't managed to
arrive at a uk-wide system for
quarantine people traveling in and out
of the UK so what do you say to say a
family in Scotland do you say well we'll
drive over the border into England fly
out of England back into England and get
around any quarantine difficulties in
Scotland would would they have your
blessing would you say that was
perfectly fine and for and for the chief
scientific adviser and the chief medical
officer was there ever a medical
scientific justification for the blanket
quarantine we imposed are back on their
June 8
well first of all and each I just really
go back to what I've said earlier I know
that the DA the devolved
administration's in in Scotland and I
think also in Wales have a slightly
different take on this but my
observation through long weeks and
months of cooperation on this is that
you know the the convoy is really going
in very much the same direction maybe
slightly different slightly different
speeds and I'm sure we'll we'll get that
together and that common sense will
apply I think on the second one our
advice has been clear that the
quarantine makes most sense and and and
can be used effectively when people are
coming from countries with higher
infection rates than the ones we have
here
that's where quarantine is a measure
that would make a difference thanks very
much
Andy a Christmas the times thank you
firstly can I just follow up Prime
Minister on some of your comments this
morning on cricket which scientific
evidence you're you're getting suggest
may not that the ball may not be such a
vector of disease after and if sown any
favor one behave themselves aren't
having tea can we get back to playing
cricket soon and then on tomorrow's easy
sage papers out today identify bars and
pubs is among the principal sources of
super spreading events so given that can
I ask so Patrick Impreza witty how
concerned they are about what's gonna
happen to our
kind of surveillance measures need to be
in place to make sure it doesn't lead to
runaway chains of infection and prime
minister sage model also suggests that
it's going to be touching you're getting
all the schools back in September even
if it all goes well
and that some other things such as pubs
might have to close to allowed if people
don't follow the rules so somehow you
don't they should be doing it tomorrow
and during the summer rich children
education in the autumn and if it came
to it would you prioritize hospitality
or education right okay let me get first
on on on on education Chris we're
absolutely determined and resolved to
get all pupils back in September gavin
williams education actually has set out
a a very very good plan for doing that I
urge our friends in the in in the
teaching unions to to work with us and
let's do it I think it's a it's it's the
right way forward it's wrong for pupils
to be out of school for so long we can
do it in September we must do it in
September provided we you know we all
behave responsibly and and keep the
virus under control indeed I would like
to see you know before the holidays in
July I was seeing more more pupils not
coming back
in in in earlier and reception years one
a near sixth and the numbers are coming
up now and that that's great to see
and also years 1012 we could have even
more some schools are making it clear
that many schools make it clear that
they have room for more pupils now
before the summer holidays I think it'd
be great thing if pupils came back now
as well as getting all pupils back and
so the people that can come back I
should say come back now and all pupils
come back in in September on your
question about cricket I just want to be
clear that I you know I wanted I having
been stumped on the radio this morning
on on that point on the science again
and being asked about the you know which
was the exact vector of
of the disease I've sought scientific
advice and medical opinions that the
third umpire has been invoked and what I
can say is that we do want to work as
fast as possible to get cricket back and
we will be publishing guidelines in the
next few days so that cricket can resume
in in time for next weekend or create
and resume next weekend I think that's
what were what we're able to say today
but I wonder if I could ask Chris
perhaps to just elucidate area boy just
a bit more about the thinking behind
cricket the numbers what what the issue
has been because I think they're you
know they're important questions people
want answers about the the transfer the
potential transfer that is easy in
cricket
thank you for cricket I mean one of the
issues in cricket is it brings together
a much larger number of people in terms
of linking households and then you do
the six people that is laid out as the
maximum on the people who should the
meeting even outdoors close now but it
is perfectly possible to have cricket
where people do keep their distance and
provided people don't do things that are
clearly not sensible ranging from
hugging the bowler if they've just
bowled someone for a duck through to
spitting on the ball it should be
possible to make the game itself really
very safe is an outdoor sport at a
distance it's not a contact sport in the
sense that some of the higher risk
outdoor sports are there are however
risks associated which we just need to
think about and deal with and this these
are perfectly manageable but the
particular ones would be with people
going in afterwards in a crowded space
for example in the pavilion to have tea
or a beer and this brings on this comes
on to the parvis you the biggest risks
are when lots of people from completely
different households are brought
together in close proximity indoors and
whether that's in a pub or a creek
villian that is a high-risk activity and
that's the reason why the really quite
onerous social distancing guidelines
that are going to cause a
significant change to pubs and cause
difficulties for many publicans and we
all recognize that are so essential
there is no doubt these are environments
whose principal job it is to bring
people together that's a great thing to
do socially but it's also a great thing
from the virus's point of view and
therefore we do have to have really
clear and really disciplined approach to
trying to maintain social distancing
whilst also enjoying pubs and this would
be true in any other environment you're
quite right to identify there are
environments in which super spreading is
more likely and that's what super spread
why super spreading occurs in those
environments are indoor environments
where people are crowded they can't
safely distance and they're together for
a long time and you're connecting lots
of different households as Chris has
said so the answer is don't let pubs
become like that make sure you've got
the appropriate covary secure
environment and people can be distanced
appropriately to try and reduce the risk
but whatever we do the fact is that
indoor environments which become crowded
and people are there for a long time
present a risk for spreading thanks very
much a Kate Proctor of the Guardians
Thank You Prime Minister and you've said
that you won't hesitate to slam on the
brakes
if the pubs reopening doesn't quite go
to planned
would you consider completely shutting
pubs if you can see in a few weeks that
this isn't working is that the kind of
handbrake measure you're referring to
and secondly and your father travelled
to Greece against non-essential travel
advice Dominic Cummings and was seem to
have broken the spirit of lockdown rules
by travelling to County Durham and why
should the public obey all the rules
that you're putting out at the moment on
the pubs reopening when it does feel as
though those close to you flout the
rules well thanks very much Kate with
first of all you know on
the episode in Durham the Durham Police
made very clear that they weren't
pursuing that I'd make it a a normal
practice not to comment on the movements
or doings of my family but what I can
tell you is that actually when you look
at what the British public have done
over the last three months it has been a
phenomenal effort to follow the guidance
and get this thing under control and
people have worked together and they've
done an absolutely heroic job and that's
why we've got incidents running so much
lower than it was only a few weeks ago
it's because of the collective efforts
of the British public we've got to keep
that going now I don't want to close all
pubs at all if we have a further
outbreak I what I've tried to say I
think that you men do you want to close
all pubs in the country I don't want to
get back to a another national lockdown
of that kind we want if we want to deal
with local outbreaks with local lockdown
measures and were greatly assisted in
our ability to do that by the the test
and trace operation you've seen it
working in Kirklees in in Ashford
weston-super-mare
we've had to do a big one now in in
Sheffield but that is the approach that
I want to take but you know obviously we
have to retain all measures in in
reserve I think the question bar though
thank you so much thank you
harriet line from PA Thank You Prime
Minister you said today that people
should wear face coverings in confined
spaces but many people aren't so are you
considering making them mandatory in
shops as it's happened in Scotland and
to the scientists do you agree with
Jacob Riis mark that pub goes should
drink a yard of ale to celebrate pubs
reopening and is there any evidence that
the protests raids and crowded beaches
that we've seen in recent weeks where
people haven't been obeying social
distancing rules have led to an uptick
in infections well I think we're
sticking to it to what we're saying on
on face coverings which is look we
when you're in a crowded space that
where you're with people that you don't
normally come into contact with the tube
is an obvious example butts but shops
there's another one then you know you
should wear a face covering but Patrick
ingress is anything anything I'm gonna
let Chris deal with the yard a veil but
the a particular infections we haven't
seen anything from those sorts of events
yet doesn't mean we won't but there's
been nothing that's been seen yet and
the same is true actually in some other
countries that wear outdoor events have
taken place there hasn't yet been any
indication we've had an uptick but it's
obviously something that needs to be
looked for and you know I'm sure Chris
will comment again on alcohol and doing
doing things safely and sensibly when I
seem to remember that mystery Smaug said
that he was going to buy the yard but
didn't say he would drink it people
clearly need to stick to the usual kind
of sensible guidelines on on drinking
and enjoy it yeah yeah and I can tell
you that I will certainly buy and drink
a pint but not a yard and I really do it
just repeat the message to everybody
this is a big turning point for us we've
got to get it right let's let's work
together and enjoy summer safely thanks
everybody so that's the end of the
briefing for today but let's recap on
what so was said in the press conference
led by the prime minister Boris Johnson
he promised to publish a timetable next
week for the reopening of businesses
including indoor gyms nail bars swimming
pools he reiterated the plan to move
away from blanket national measures to
local targeted lock downs with the
possibility of temporarily shutting
individual businesses he urged people to
act safely and celebrate this weekend
when pubs and restaurants reopened
tomorrow in England and he warned that
were not out of the woods yet and that
he would not hesitate to impose
restrictions again
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News